First I should give an introduction to how I approached the challenge of sitting with a painting for 3 hours. I am altering the rules given by the Harvard professor who came up with the idea, and am instead doing the following:
- listening to music during the 3 hours. Over a long career I found music helps me focus on tasks vs distracting me
- I am not focusing on the physical details of the painting. I am instead going to let all ideas flow freely. I feel that fear of ideas actually causes a constraint that makes the user not approach tasks honestly. I want all and any ideas to be valid.
- will take any necesarry breaks (like bathroom). but will add this time on at the end to make sure I make a complete 3 hours

The painting I chose for this task was Jackson Pollock's "Number 5" from 1948. It is one of his famous "drip" paintings. I wanted to use an abstract painting so that all and any random thoughts and images could flow, vs a representational painting which might follow a formula, and would have some specific expectations around its meaning.

My first impression of the overall painting:
I love how colorful and dynamic it is. It seems to have a dark bacground, although I am not sure this is the canvas or the total coverage of the paint he used for it. The lines have a good mix of vertical, horizontal and curvature, so that it has an overall feeling of motion and dynamism to it.
I realize that a splatter in the upper left of the painting looks to me like a rabbit up on its back feet, turning its head around, and shooting light or fire out of its mouth. This is almost certainly not an intent of Pollock :)
It even has a dot where its right eye would be, glowing and looking in the direction of the light/fire. It's not hitting anything with the fire, just shooting it into space.
The initial music I chose (to start with) is Bruckner's Eighth Symphony. I generally like Bruckner, especially for peaceful thinking and meditation.
Near the bottom center of the painting I notice a symbol that is vaguely reminiscent of the infinity symbol, although slightly stretched taller on each end.
Infinity is a concept I've been thinking about lately. While the calculus model of the universe assumes infinity and then figures out a mathematics that fits that model. I don't think that is correct. Most likely the universe does have a lower limit like Planck's length, and all subsequent subdivisions have not measureable difference to the surrounding regions of space. This would mean that the universe is instead discrete at its core, and that we simply don't measure it down to such a small level to detect it. The concept of infinity would be just theorectical, and calculus, while uswful, would not be a correct description.
I notice at the upper left near the rabbit, a cartoon like smiling face. It's the most common thing to find faces and representations of people in abstraction, since it's our closest reference and is critical to survival. We often scan faces to see if there is a danger.
In the upper middle I see an arch that reminds me of the St Louis Arch. I have not visited St Louis, and don't think I have been in the state of Missouri ever. I came closest when I took a work trip to Cincinnati, and met some people from Missouri there. I had a very high opinion of Ohio when I visited. I thought it was big, flat and very green. But I met various people who were from Ohio, and several were not as kind to Ohio as me. :)
That reminds me of how I feel about New York state. While people might have an impression of New York that centers around New York City, the state is completely different. It is really big, beautiful, green and majestic in some places in New York state. I have the thought that if I had infinite funds and could decide to live anywhere, I would choose upstate New York to settle.
Near the uppper left of center is a drip that resembles and arm holding a billiard ball. I have played pool only a few times in my entire life. It is an OK hobby, but it seemed to attract a lowly crowd. One of the few times I played, some pool shark tried to get me and friends into a gamble on a game. We said no, which was easy at the time since I was pretty destitute of money anyway, so didn't have anything to gamble. While I lived in Las Vegas for a couple years, I never felt any attraction to gambling. Some folks in my family love it, but the bug never got to me. I loved the trappings around Las Vegas and the casinos, but I didn't subsidize them very well. I have not visited Las Vegas since I moved away, which was more than 30 years ago. I hear it has become more expensive while at the same time more rundown, which isn't making me want to visit anytime soon. If I give it another couple years maybe they will get their house in order.
There's a dark blotch in the lower right corner that vaguely reminds me of a bear paw print. We have black bears near us, during last winter (or the one previous?) they actually wandered down to our neighborhood and snuck around. Our two kids saw them near the end of our street.
We have a small canyon near us that most likely holds wildlife, especially coyotes. We have heard coyote howling on some nights, but not often. We also have owls very near out house, one of them is hooting every night recently. We assume this is because there are rats in the neighborhood vacinity. The neighborhood is not overrun with them, but a few might be enough to attract and owl.
We also have small rabbits that we primarily see in the summer. Some are pretty bold and will only run away as you get closer. We're not sure if that's because anyone is feeding them, or they just haven't learned to fear any predator.
There's a long drip down the left center to the bottom that reminded me of a peacock feather, although only as a first impression. We lived in a house that was next door to my father's parents for a while, and some of the neighbors had peacocks that would roam the woods. They didn't venture out into the open much, but they liked the woods. I remember I would always turn and walk away when I saw a peacock male in the distance. They were beautiful birds, but very large and supposedly aggressive. 
That house and the land around it was one of my favorite places while we were growing up. The house itself was large and had a beautiful interior. The people who my mother bought it from were older and retired to Arizona. For a couple years after they moved, they subscribed us to Arizona Highways magazine. We used to love looking at the pictures in it because it was such a contrast to New Jersey.
There was a barn in the back of the house, at the end of the driveway that ran along the fence that separated us from our grandparents house. We didn't use the barn for anything but storing yard tools, but it was a fun place to explore.
We had a pond on the side of the house opposite our driveway. It would freeze over in winter and folks from all around the area would come and skate on it. My mom would leave the outside light on at night so folks could see what was going on. I was the worst skater in my family, and probably the worst skater of anyone I have ever known. I could roller skate but I could not for the life of me ice skate.
Behind the barn was the garden that used to be tended by the previous people. We never did anything with it, but I think our grandparents may have used it since it was just lying fallow while we were there. The woods were next to that garden and ran back to the pond and for quite a distance behind it.
We also had a small group of trees in our front yard fronting right up against the road that ran in front. The small group of trees and the woods in the back were my favorite places to run around, think and explore. There's something about the dense woods that makes me feel at home and safe. And lets my imagination run wild. I had a million imaginary adventures in those woods.
We did live in at least one other house that was as nice, but nothing quite the same as that house and land. I wonder if my imagination and way of thinking would have turned out differently if we had stayed there.
Another thing I remember of that place is sitting with our grandfather on his front porch, and he was telling us about angels and aliens. I think his belief was that aliens and UFOs were actually angels. He told us this, although I never figured out why it was important for him to tell us about this. When our mom heard of this, she was not happy :)
She wanted us to be raised without any specific theology so that we could choose ourselves when we were adults.
Another memory of that place was that while our grandparents still lived there (I can't remember if we still lived in that adjoining house or if we had moved), they built a wildlife park nearby. It was surprisingly close to our grandparents. It was one of the drive through safari type places. After the drive, there was a park with rides and a stage. I remember watching some kind of stage show there. I think it was Bugs Bunny - Looney Tunes themed, because I think that's the toy I came home with (a toy Bugs Bunny). I believe they closed the park after a number of years because , like a lot of these places, the animals were not being treated completely humanely.

Listening to the end of Bruckner Symphony 8 , which is quite dramatic. Symphony 5 is queued up next.

Another memory of that location near my grandparents was that they had a fairy tale village nearby too. This was a small place with things like A diorama house of the Red Riding Hood story that you could peek into through some windows. Our grandparents would take us there now and then, and we loved it when we were small. I think I looked this up on Google Maps recently and I believe it's still running in that same location, 50 years later!

One last memory of that town was that the schools were really nice and well run. All the nice suburbs in New Jersey had nice schools then and they were well funded.

On the very right hand side of the painting, near the vertical center, I see a streak that resembles a conductor on a podium with their arms raised. This is fortuitous given that I am listening to classical music :)

I did not listen to classical until recently, very late in life. I found it the most difficult music to feel a kinship too.

Some of the earliest music I remember was rock and roll, and that we got Beatles and Monkees albums as gifts sometimes. We had possibly the worst Bealtes album over, them playing at the Hollywood Bowl live. The only thing we could hear on the record was the screaming audience, the band was barely audible in the background. 

The Hollywood Bowl is a good tie in with the conductor streak as well, since I believe they still have a lot of classical music concerts there.

I have visited LA several times for work, and I really loved it. There is an insane amount of traffic in LA, and it runs all night long in some places! But the overall impression I have of LA is laid back, nice people who are happy and are trying to make a living so they can keep living in the dreamland of LA.

I didn't listen to music for a few years when I was younger, before my teens. When I got to my teens I didn't go back to rock and roll, but instead listened to jazz. When I hiy eighteen or so, I discovered Keith Jarret, who is one of my all time favorite musicians. The first album I bought was his famous Koln Concert, and I was hooked immediately. It still remains one of my favorite albums. I can't really conceive at the mind that can improvise at that level live, in front of a crowd, but I am sure it takes a lifetime of practice. 
I did get to see Keith Jarrett live one time (he is not currently playing anymore after he suffered a stroke).

The ending of the Bruckner 8th is playiong now, and it is quite spectacular. It is conducted by Celibidache, who is rightly known for conducting Bruckner.

I saw Keith Jarrett live at Zellerbach Hall on the Berkeley campus. He was in really good spirits that night. He told a funny story about him and Gary Peacock and Jack DeJohnette (his trio) coming across the marching band on campus and being quite impressed by the sheer power of the sound, if not the musicality :)
Zellerbach Hall was in the news recently because it hosted a Turning Point event (post Charlie Kirk assassination) that turned violent. I have such good memories of that place that it's a shame that is the most recent event that has happened there.
My wife and I also saw Philip Glass music there live years ago, and at the end Philip Glass came out of the wings and took a bow. I can't recall exactly what piece of music it was, for some reason I picture a boat on waves as part of the background to it at some point. I need to hunt it down so I can give it a fresh listen.

My wife and I also saw Alison Krauss and Union Station in Marin (or Sonoma?) county years ago. That was when she was at the height of her fame. I remember when my wife moved in with me, that the one thing in common in our CD collections was that we both had Alison Krauss.

After jazz, rock and roll came back into my musical life. This culminated in seeing and listening to the Grateful Dead, another of the artists near the top of my list of favorites. Grateful Dead live stories would take a whole other time to document fairly, which I may do at some point :)

Finally, classical music came across my path. Very slowly and subtly at the beginning, I just wanted to feel out the water and see if it was worth diving in any deeper. I think what sealed the deal for me and classical music was Glenn Gould. Not just his Goldberg Variations, but everything I heard by him was top notch. 
My favorite story about him (that he used to tell himself) was that when he was young , he had a classmate who was a child delinguent and always getting into trouble.
He saw him a while later , and he was now well behaved and polite. When Gould (or his parents, I can't remember which) asked about the change, they were told that his classmate had seen Glenn play live. And while the friend didn't believe in God beforehand, after he saw Glenn play, he believed in God and thought he should start behaving right. :)
This is supposedly a true story too !

Classical music is an interesting hobby, because it can be like looking for a needle in a haystack. There are many, many good recordings of the classical repertoire. But I am always seeking that thing that is a level above. What keeps me going, is that when I do find that great artist like Gould or Celibidache, it is so good that it keeps me motivated to looking for the next one.
One interesting, well known fact about Celibidache is that he did not want his music recorded. He believed that the live performance was the key, the interaction of the audience with the performers and the music. The only reason we have recordings of his, is that he allowed radio broadcasts of his concerts, since he believed the energy of the live remote radio audience was also valid for the music. His wife and manager then set up recording of his concerts over the radio, and after he died they have released a large amount of his recordings. This is for the benefit of everyone, and I am glad they skirted around his no recording policy.

A find lately that is very similar to Celibidache is Massiliamo Cobra (sp?). He is a (Brazilian I think?) conductor. One thing that I didn't mention about Celibidache, that's relevant to Cobra, is that both of them would/will use traditional tempo markings as a general idea, but not a hard and fast rule that matches current standard.

I believe Celibidache did this because he was going with the spirit of the music, and he would speed up or slow down as the spirit moved him and the music.
But I think Cobra does this due to the controversy over historic metronome markings. This is a theoryu that old composers were going by a full tick of the metronome (to one side and back), versus just a half tick. So the music would be twice as slow when played. This is actually borne out by quite a few facts.

For example, there are some Chopin pieces that pianists train for their whole lives, and still cannot achieve. There are several of his works that have no "correct" performance if we go by modern, standard tempo markings. It is impossible that the performers and instruments in Chopin's time would be faster and more adept.
There is also a contemporary of Chopin or Beethoven (I can't remember which) who said that all modern players (this is the early twentieth century if I recall) were all faster and more technically adept then they were in the old days. And that they were p;aying the music much too fast! :)

Cobra's performance of Wagnef and Bruckner are especially good. I believe there is one movement from a Bruckner symphony that goes for over 45 minutes. This is a fun experience since it is like listening to an entirely different work.

The Bruckner finished, so I put on a Grateful Dead recording. I think this was recorded the night they heard that Neal Cassidy had died. Supposedly he just laid down by some railroad tracks Mexico and passed away. He had been living at a breakneck speed for over a decade, so it's not a surprise that he burned out eventually.

He is a major part of The Electric Kool Aid Acid Test book. He drove the bus cross country so that Kesey and the Pranksters could meet Kerouack and Timothy Leary, and he supposedly drove often high on speed. He would non stop talk and improvise while on speed, so the trip was at least in large part his long drug filled ramblings. The other part I remember him in the book was when Kesey fled to Mexico and they were getting followed by a Mexican police detective. Cassidy would toss a sledge hammer non chalantly to keep busy, and once he threw it to crack a rock to intimidate the officer. Despite all the drama, Kesey came back to the US to face justice on drug charges.

An image on the left center of Pollack's painting reminds me of an ancient Greek helmet. This has me thinking of the new Christopher Nolan Odyssey that is coming out soom. The Greeks had a feeling for drama in their plays and epics that I am not sure has been equalled. The story of a tragic war followed by a hero's long quest to get home is indeed a great plot in which to examine a lot of human trumphs and tragedies. I like that the characters in Greek mythology and drama don't always follow any traditional concept , that we currently use in the Anglosphere, of good or bad. Often they simply are.

Achilles is a good example of this. Is Achilles a hero or a villain? I don't think he's either. Is Paris a hero or villain? The same answer I think. Real people are complex and often exhibit good and bad traits on an ongoing basis. I recently looked at the myth that supposedly kicked off the Trojan War, and just the myth itself is full of moral ambiguity. 

Considering Greek myth, my wife and I recetly discussed the ship of Theseus thought problem. Our deck is original wood we think, which would place it at decades old. We have started replacing pieces of it, starting with the worst pieces first. When we are done, is it a brand new deck? Or just an updated original deck? At what point does it flip from original to new? There were already holes in some spots in it, so was it even original before we even started replacing pieces? These thoughts don't keep me up at night but I find them very interesting :)

Carrying that idea to ourselves, there is the old question if it's also true for humans and other living creatures. I can remember my childhood, but am I the same person who is remembering? Virtually my entire body has been replaced by now, so which part of me thinks that there is still a connection to the original me? If I am different, at what point did I change into a new being?

It seems impossible to reduce these all down to material explanations. Even if I could find some neurons in my brain that are retaining these memories, is that what is meant by mind? If mind and these small parts of my brain are thought to be synonymous, what makes me take any action that is other than negligible to keep myself alive (if even that is of interest).

For example, when I visited Las Vegas I had an immense yearning to move there. I worked two jobs for a summer so I could save money for the move. I got a job offer in Vegas for a similar position to one of the two jobs I was doing already, so that was really a lateral move. So what compelled me to do all that work? If we can reduce all down to a few memory keeping neurons, what is my motivation? I chased some women once I moved, but I already had similar "offers" back home :)  What compelled me to do it?

It would be neat and easy for me to reduce it all down to a few neurons being surrounded by a body that just gets me from point A to B. But this borders on the ludicrous when I consider all that mankind has and continues to achieve.  We do majestic things and sometimes get little or no reward. This would contradict any pure biological advantage explanation.

When I was younger I was a huge fan of Darwin and the natural selection model, and went on to study it in school. But now that I am older, I think I see the incompleteness of this model.  It's not just the incomplete fossil record, or the almost impossible mathematics of mutation driven evolution. It is the lack of any model of conciousness. If we consider the brain the center of conciousness and this is a material model, how and when does conciousness appear in the brain? Why are humans uniquely endowed with it if it is only material and has no other evolutionary benefit.
Now as I sit back and look at the painting as a whole, like at the start, I see a picture of neurons in a brain! while admittedly more colorful, the somewhat chaotic network reminds me specifically of neurons with their various connections.

I don't think Pollack has that in mind, but it is fitting now that I am coming to the end of considering the painting. While I zoom in I can see various anthropomorphic images that trigger memories, now that I end on thinking of brain and mind, I see a large neural network in front of me. While I don't think the paiting is concious, it is the product of conciousness. And my observing it is also an act of conciousness. While it would exist regardless of my observation of it, this specific observation can only come from an impossibly improbably series of events that brought it in front of me today.

A work of art is subjective and unique to the viewer, because in the end, its primary important place of existence is in our conciousness. As pure material it has no value or meaning. But when we observe and record our impressions, it has a potentially immense meaning and significance. 

As I come to the end of the 3 hours, it has been a huge pleasure to sit with this work of art. To stare at it and think about it has revealed all amount of unexpected and seemingly random thoughts and connections. While many of us spend less time with this large event of observation, I can now see the invaluable need for it to persist.
I will probably try this again with a new work of art. I don't think it needs to be a painting, I really think it can be a movie or even a TV show, if it elicits deep thought. It's less important the target for the concentration, than the effort and concentration itself. A large periof of time devoted to such a singular thing is the new joyful outlier of experiece. We should all turn off distractions, whenever we can, and experience this joy.

Hopefully will be sharing a similar experience soon , as I try and make this an ongoing part of my life.

Bye for now :) 